Vinyl 6.0 Start Guide



Vinyl supports a wide range of feature that cover the most common use cases for audio:

  - Easy functions for fade in, fade out, and playback control
  - Shuffle patterns to choose random sounds, pitches, and gains for playback
  - Head-loop-tail patterns to implement smoother background music
  - Blend patterns to mix between multiple sounds at the same time with a single parameter
  - Queues to create in-game playlists or dynamic scores
  - Mix groups to easily adjust the gain of multiple sounds and patterns at the same time
  - Duckers to handle crossfades and ducking
  - Live update of all the above using a simple JSON format
  - Easier gain control that allow you to exceed GameMaker's normal maximum gain

But at its core, Vinyl is a wrapper around GameMaker's native audio functions. Vinyl saves the
hassle of setting up data structures that you'd typically use to adjust gains, set up pitch
randomisation, create audio queues, etc.  Its main job is to take configuration data and make sense
of that when you want to play some audio.

As a result, Vinyl is, at its core, a system for storing and recalling audio data. No matter what
Vinyl functions you call, at the case level Vinyl is reading data from some struct somewhere that
you've defined. Vinyl offers multiple ways to manipulate the audio data it holds internally with
the idea being that different use cases will want a different interface for setting up audio. There
are three ways to interact with Vinyl's audio data:

    1. On boot, call some VinylSetup*() functions to create patterns
    2. Edit __VinylConfigJSON() to define patterns
    3. Store some JSON externally and call VinylSetupImportJSON() to import that JSON

You can combine these in any way you want but for the sake of simplicity I'd stick to one approach.



=== 1. VinylSetup*() functions ===

If you've been making your own audio system previously then the most natural point of entry is
probably to use the VinylSetup*() functions. These are straight-forward global function calls that
set up sounds, mixes, and patterns. You can technically call them at any point but you should try
to call these functions once on boot, or at least very soon after boot. Each function has their own
description in the script themselves.

However, if you opt to use VinylSetup*() functions then you will be missing out on a major features
of Vinyl, which is live editing of your audio setup. If you're just looking for something simple
then this is likely not a concern.



=== 2. Edit __VinylConfigJSON() ===

If you're a JSON sicko like myself then you'll likely enjoy the option of using __VinylConfigJSON()
to set up Vinyl. This JSON expects a specific format. Please read the "Vinyl JSON Format" note
included with the library for more information.

Using __VinylConfigJSON() opens up the possibility of live editing audio properties. If
VINYL_LIVE_EDIT is set to <true> and you're running your game on Windows, Mac, or Linux then you
will be able to modify the contents of __VinylConfigJSON() at runtime and hear the results. This is
great for quickly fixing problems without having to reboot the game.

N.B. The parser that I wrote to handle live update for __VinylConfigJSON() is very simple and
     cannot handle most GML syntax. If you intend to use the live updating feature you should
     treat the JSON written in this file as "pure JSON" and you should not use functions,
     conditionals, if-statements, or any logic at all.



=== 3. External JSON ===

If you'd like to write some external tooling or make the JSON file used to determine audio setup
externally available then you can use VinylSetupImportJSON() and VinylSetupExportJSON() to move
JSON in and out of the game at runtime. Live updating will work if you use external JSON, though
of course you are responsible for importing JSON yourself if something changes. For information on
what format JSON Vinyl expects, please see the "Vinyl JSON Format" note included with the library.